
Contact:
    Name:
    Organization:
    Email Address:
    Phone Number:

Z-Mail Version: ["zmail -version", "zmlite -version", or "version" 
                 command within zmail]
Operating System:
Hardware:
Interface used: [tty, fullscreen, Motif, Open Look, Lite]
Additional information needed for Lite users.
    Terminal type: [DEC, Wyse, AT&T, ...]
    Emulation: [vt100, wyse75, ...]
    Communications software: [Procomm, Crosstalk, ...]

Automatic Acknowledgement: Yes	[Change to No to suppress acknowledgement]

Bug Type:  (choose one of the following)
    1.  Lost Data, Software Crash
    2.  Feature Malfunction (no workaround)
    3.  Feature Malfunction (workaround exists)
    4.  Documentation Error
    5.  Feature Request
    6.  Usage/Operation Question

1-Line Summary:

Full Description:

	<Please replace this text with as complete a description of the
	problem as you can.  Include any details about your local system
	that you think may be helpful to us.>

How to Reproduce:

	<Please replace this text with step-by-step instructions that
	our support staff can use to duplicate the error.>

Debugger stack trace (if applicable): [may be many lines]

----- Delete the following lines before sending bug report -----

If you have a level 1 bug (the software crashed with a core dump),
please use adb, dbx, or gdb to provide a stack trace from the core
file.  The bug may have occured from Motif or other system libraries
so it is important to know where the problem originated.  Help us by
providing as much information as you can such as how to reproduce the
problem, etc.  If you use dbx or suspect a problem with X or Motif,
please use the -sync command line option when running Z-Mail to assure
that the server is synchronized with Z-Mail.  Otherwise, debugging
results may be inconclusive.

Please DO NOT send core files.  In general, a core file is not useful
except on the machine where it was generated.

A general debugging convenience is to use the "debug" command at the
command line (from any user interface).  Debugging output can be used
to examine what the program is doing at all times.  The environment
variable DBFILE can be set to the filename where debugging out is sent.
