Wed Oct  7 22:22:13 PST 2009

INTRODUCTION: This project contains the open source version of
Z-Mail, plus the original MUSH source code from which Z-Mail was derived.
I, Dan Heller,  was the original author of both programs, though not
the sole contributor. More about that in the HISTORY section below.

Z-Mail is an email client--that is, a program a person uses to read
email. It was, in fact, the first  available email client based entirely
on internet protocols. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, there were
plenty of free email clients for unix, but in the commercial realm,
all other email programs used a proprietary networking protocol and
mailbox format, and they required a gateway to connect to other email
systems on the internet. Z-Mail had none of these problems.

Z-Mail was released into the open source community back in 2005 by
Netmanage Inc at my request. (Again, see the HISTORY section below.) My
goal in putting Z-Mail online is not to revive it. It's more to keep it
alive in the public record; to create a form of historical document and
to provide first-hand glimpse into the source code of a bygone era. If
someone wants to use it, be my guest.

Until recently, I have built and used zmail successfully on various
systems ever since the early 1990s without having to examine the source
code. But when I migrated from a redhat linux to a debian system this
year, zmail suddenly failed to build anymore, and I found myself unable
(and uninterested) in dealing with it anymore. So, I punted and resigned
to using gmail.

In 2009, I and Akkana Peck revived the code and got it working again
and made it public on Google Code.

HISTORY: In 1985, I started a software project that involved, among
other things, creating an internet-based email client that had multiple
user interfaces: a traditional text-based (command-line) prompt, a
"cursor-driven" interface for text-based terminals, and what was then
a new graphical user interface for Sun Workstations. (Sun had just
introduced a more usable and formally written API for the underlying
windows and graphics displays. At the time, it was called, "SunWindows.")

My mail client was called the Mail User's Shell -- aka MUSH. It's main
feature was that it was built using abstract modules, each of which
had program entry points from a light scripting language. This design
allowed the core functionality to be separate from all its various
user interfaces--text or graphical. It also made it possible plug in
or out features that would allow it to be light (and diverse) enough to
be portable to all UNIX platforms, as well as most any other operation
system... including MS-DOS 1.1. (Yes, a 16-bit OS running on a PC with
as little as 64K of RAM.)

Fast-forward five years: much interest in the program had compelled me
to start a company with my then informal co-developer (Bart Schaefer)
who was just graduating with his PhD from Oregon Graduate Institute and
needed a job. He could have had many jobs, but he agreed to join me in
founding Z-Code Software; our flagship product was called, Z-Mail.

Over the next two years, we evolved Z-Mail from the MUSH code base by
adding a new GUI, beefed up the underlying core technology, enhanced the
scripting language, opened up to MacOS and MS-Windows 3.1, supported
various forms of POP and IMAP, and even created an extension to IMAP
called Zync -- the Z-Mail Synchronization protocol. (Though the Zync
server was never really released, it did address many shortcomings of
IMAP that have never really been addressed since.)

Z-Mail also supported open network-based directory services, and true
MIME-based email attachments. (In fact, MIME had actually evolved from
more informal proposals from a variety of prototype email clients,
including Z-Mail's.)

From 1990 to 1993, our program and company grew in popularity and
notoriety, winning "Product of the Year" awards from various industries
across all computing platforms, from PC Magazine to the UNIX workstation
markets. Virtually every major corporation in the world used Z-Mail at
some point, though admittedly, only a few deployed it company-wide, or
beyond several thousand users. Z-Mail was most especially popular among
IT executives who were stressing about their transition from local-area
networks to internet-based architectures. (It takes time to force a
locomotive to change tracks.)

What made Z-Mail popular was that it worked everywhere, it worked
consistently, and it never crashed. It was (and still remains today)
the most ported email client ever--if it had a CPU, we probably had
a version of Z-Mail that ran on it. Sadly and mistakenly--and over
the objection of my employees--I "sold" the company (some called it a
"merger") with another, larger (and publicly traded) company, Network
Computing Devices (NCD). The intention was that we would leverage their
410 employees and 65 sales offices worldwide. Alas, As many had predicted,
we fell victim to the classic problem of clashing cultures between that
of a more staid, publicly traded hardware company, and that of a more
limber and entrepreneurial software company. I left within 3 months,
and NCD had all but collapsed shortly thereafter.

Before its own demise, NCD sold Z-Mail to a company called Netmanage
Inc., who at the time were in the business of selling Windows-based
networking and productivity applications that ran over TCP/IP. At
that time, Microsoft did not embrace the internet yet, and was still
promoting their own proprietary network as the "network of the future,"
allowing companies like Netmanage to rake in the dough that MS didn't
think existed. Among Netmanage's suite of desktop applications was their
own email client, which they then renamed as Z-Mail (once they bought
the rights to ours), and shelved our original Z-Mail product (save for
providing support to its existing customer base).

But this wasn't to last long either, as Netmanage also fell into hard
times in the years after Microsoft finally adopting the internet,
both literally and figuratively. The original Z-Mail then found
itself in a state of suspended animation; even though it wasn't
seeing the light of day, Netmanage still owned the rights. I had
lobbied intensively for five years for them to release Z-Mail
to the open source community; they finally did so in 2005. (See
http://www.danheller.com/zmail/netmanage-letter)

Though I had finally gotten my hands on it again, it wasn't the joy I'd
hoped it to be. I had already embraced my new profession (photography),
and didn't really want to put a lot of time into "relearning" Z-Mail. So,
I wasn't comfortable assuming a technical lead in re-releasing it to
the open source community, or of coordinating developers. Past engineers
familiar Z-Mail had moved on, and my partner Bart was always suspicious
of the "open-source" proclamation from Netmanage, so he wouldn't touch
it either.

So, there it sat. And has been sitting. Until today.

My posting the source code here is something I should have done in 2005,
but was selfishly indifferent to Z-Mail by that time. I've never been
concerned about Bart's fear of liability -- I spend a great deal of time
in the world of intellectual property, rights, copyright, trademark,
and related matters, and I know there's no risk. Furthermore, I'm the
one putting it online, so Bart and/or anyone else can feel absolved of
psychological stress. No one but me is doing this.

Lastly, I'd like to give a nod of praise and acknowledgment to those
who worked hard to make Z-Mail succeed, while also apologizing for my
having inadvertently sentenced it to an early death. Had we waited just
a few more years, we might have at least benefited from the irrational
exuberance that shaped the tech boom of the 1990s. After all, if Microsoft
would buy hotmail for $500M, surely Z-Mail would have gotten that much
from Netscape. :-)
