?
     List the available commands.

about
     Give general information about Z-Mail and its authors.

alias, unalias, group
     Creates, lists or removes mail aliases (address abbreviations).

alternates, alts
     Tells Z-Mail about other e-mail addresses you may have.

ask
     Asks a question and obtains a response from the user.

await
     In Motif mode, checks for new mail and then continues.

builtin
     Allows a function with the same name as a standard Z-Mail 
     command. Precede a function name with builtin to make 
     Z-Mail perform the standard command instead of the function.

bind-macro, unbind-macro
    Create, list or remove fullscreen mode macros.

button, unbutton
     Creates, lists, or removes buttons in the Main Window Action 
     Area. In fullscreen mode, these buttons are available through 
     the user-button macro.

cd
     Changes the current working directory.

chroot	
     Limits the directories you may access in a File Finder.

close
     Closes an open folder.

cmd, uncmd
     Creates, lists or removes command abbreviations.

compcmd	
     Performs actions on compositions in progress.

copy, co
    Copy messages to another folder, without setting the saved (S)
    status flag of those messages.  Messages having the saved status
    may be deleted when a folder is updated, so this command can be
    used to assure that two folders each contain a copy of a message.

debug
    Enable debugging output.  Use "setenv DBFILE filename" to save this
    output in a file instead of displaying it.

delete, d
    Delete messages.  Deleted messages are not permanently removed from
    a folder until that folder is updated.  Some commands will skip over
    deleted messages.

detach
    Store one or more attachments of a message in files, and optionally
    display those attachments.

dialog
     Displays a dialog box for any one of the following: Aliases, 
     Buttons, Colors, Compose, Dates, Envelope, Folders, Fonts, 
     Headers, Help, Printer, Search, Sort, Templates, Toolbox and 
     Variables, Buttons, Functions, Menus, Browser, Save, Filters.

display
     Displays the contents of a message.

dp, dt
     Delete a message and display (print or type) the next
     message.  See "next" for rules used to location the 
     next message.
each
     Executes a command you specify on each message in a mes-
     sage list.

echo, error
     Re-displays the commands you type, expanding all arguments 
     to show their values.

edit, e, v
    In line mode only, edit the contents of one or more messages, using
    either the "editor" or the "visual" editor.

else
    Introduces the alternative case of an if...else...endif conditional.
    This is not a true command, rather it is a control structure.  It
    may be used only in user-defined functions or scripts, and must be
    on a line by itself.

endif
    Marks the end of an if...else...endif conditional.  This is not a
    true command, rather it is a control structure.  It may be used only
    in user-defined functions or scripts, and must be on a line by itself.

eval
     Re-parses its arguments, then executes them as a command.

exit, x, xit
     Terminates Z-Mail without updating any folders. In user-
     defined scripts, terminates the script. The x command always 
     terminates Z-Mail.

expand
     Shows the addresses referenced by a mail alias. Z-Mail fully 
     expands nested or hierarchical aliases.

filter, unfilter
     Creates, lists, or removes message filters.

flags
    Examine or set the status flags of messages.  Status flags are:
	D deleted    O old         R read     U unread       p printed
	N new        P preseved    S saved    f forwarded    r replied


folder, fo
    Change the active folder, open a folder, or close a folder.

folders
     Lists the folders that are present in the folder directory. 
     
foreach
    Perform a command for each message in a list of messages or for each
    file in a list of file names.  This differs from "each" in that a
    variable is set to contain each of the items in turn.

from, f
    Display the header summary of one or more messages, and optionally
    change the current message to the first or last of those messages.

fullscreen
    Change from the line mode to the fullscreen mode.  Cannot be used
    in GUI mode.

function
    Create a user-defined function.

headers, H, h, z, z+, z-
    Display a screenful of header summaries.  Useful only in line mode
    or in user-defined functions.  The "z" forms move one screenful
    forward or backward.  These commands may also be used to select
    groups of messages by their status, as follows:
	:d  deleted        :n  new            :r  replied-to
	:f  forwarded      :o  old            :s  saved
	:m  marked         :p  preserved      :u  unread

functions	
     Lists the names of all user-defined functions.

help
     Displays help information on various topics, which follow 
     as options.

hide, unhide
     Hides and displays specified messages summaries in the main 
     window.

history
     Displays a list of recently-entered commands.

iconify
     Convert all Z-Mail windows to icon state.

if ... else ... endif
     Defines conditional processing in a script. Use only in 
     user-defined functions and scripts.

ignore, unignore
     Tells Z-Mail which message header fields to hide when it 
     displays messages.

interpose, uninterpose
     Allows a user-defined function to "piggyback" on top of a 
     Z-Mail command or operation.

jobs
     Show a summary of the compositions (Compose Windows) 
     currently in progress.

license
     Manipulates licensing for the current Z-Mail session.

lpr
     Sends the contents of messages to the printer.

mail, m
     Opens a window so you can compose a message.

map, unmap
     Create, list or remove line mode key bindings.

map!, unmap!
     Create, list or remove composition mode key bindings.

mark, unmark
     Tags messages with priorities or temporary marks, 
     or removes those priorities or marks.

menu, unmenu
     Creates or removes menu items and menus from 
     Z-Mail windows.

merge
     Copies messages from a folder you specify into your 
     active folder.

msg_list
     Simplifies a message list in metacharacter form into a 
     simple list of numbers.

my_hdr, un_hdr
     Creates, lists or removes custom headers that Z-Mail inserts at 
     the beginning of all your outgoing messages.

next, n
     Displays the contents of the next message, or the current 
     message if it has not yet been read.

open
     Opens a folder, or makes that folder active if it is already open.

page
     Displays a file in a Z-Mail pager window.

pick, search
     Searches for and selects messages according to a variety of 
     criteria. Synonym for search.

pinup
     Displays a message in a Pinup Window, to be viewed simulta
     neously with other messages in the Message Window.

pipe
     Sends the contents of selected messages as input to standard 
     UNIX commands.

preserve, unpreserve, pre, unpre
     Saves a message list in your system folder rather than your main 
     mailbox unless you explicitly delete it. 

previous
    Display the contents of the previous message.  The previous message
    is is the message nearest to the current message, having a lower
    message number, that has not been saved or deleted.

printenv
     Displays the set of environment strings that Z-Mail passes to 
     other UNIX processes that it creates.

print
     Synonym for display.

pwd
     Prints the name of the current working directory.

quit, q
     Terminates Z-Mail, after updating any open folders that have 
     been modified.

read
     Synonym for display.

redraw
     Causes all Z-Mail window to "refresh".

remove
     Remove a file; see also rmfolder.

rename
     Changes the name of a folder.

reply, r
     Replies to a message you have received, addressing the 
     response only to the sender of that message.

replyall, R
    Compose a reply to a message you have recieved, addressing the reply
    to the sender of that message and also to all of the persons who
    received a copy of that message.

replysender, reply, respond, r
    Compose a reply to a message you have received, addressing the reply
    only to the sender of that message.

resume, fg
    Resume a suspended composition, identified by its number.  To list
    the numbers of all suspended composition, use the "jobs" command.

retain, unretain
    Specify exactly those message header fields that should be shown when
    displaying the contents of messages.  All other headers are hidden.
    
return
     Terminates a script and returns a result.

rmfolder
     Remove a folder, first closing it if it is open and checking 
     whether it is empty.

save, s
     Saves the current message to a file or folder.

saveopts
     Stores a copy of all of the current Z-Mail settings in a file.

search
     Searches for and selects messages according to a variety of 
     criteria.

set, unset
     Sets the values of Z-Mail variables, or removes those variables 
     and their values.

setenv
     Sets the values of environment strings that Z-Mail passes to 
     other UNIX processes it creates.

sh
     Executes a command using the shell (/bin/sh).

shift
    Remove one or more arguments from the list of arguments passed to a
    user-defined function.  Arguments are removed from the left (front) of
    the list, and the remaining arguments are renumbered starting from 1.

close, shut
    Close a folder (usually the active folder).  This is the same as
    "folder -shut".  

sort
    Sort the messages in the active folder according to a variety of
    criteria.  The messages are renumbered to reflect the new order.

source
    Read and execute commands from a script file.

stop
    Suspend the Z-Mail process.  This is not available on all operating
    systems.  In GUI mode, this is the same as "iconify".

top
    Display the first few lines of the contents of a message.

undelete, u
    Remove the deleted (*) status flag from messages.  This may be done
    at any time before a folder is updated.

undigest
    Unpack a digest message into its component messages, either storing
    those messages in a file or merging them into the active folder.

update
    Store all changes that have been made to a folder (usually the
    active folder) back to disk.  Deletions become permanent once a
    folder is updated.  Saved messages are normally deleted from the
    spool mailbox on update, and may optionally be deleted from other
    folders as well.

version
    Display the current version of Z-Mail.

write, w
    Store the text of messages to a file, without storing any of the
    message headers.  Files created with this command cannot be read
    back into Z-Mail as folders.
